# PedsPheWAS R package

## Introduction

The PedsPheWAS R package is designed to perform phenome-wide association
studies (PheWAS) using pediatric phecodes (Peds-Phecodes).

This package was built based on the original PheWAS R package available
at: <https://github.com/PheWAS/PheWAS>

## Installation

To install the latest development version of the PedsPheWAS R package,
use the following code:

    # install and load required packages 
    packages <- c("devtools","vroom","tidyverse","dplyr","parallel")
    installed_packages <- packages %in% rownames(installed.packages())
    if (any(installed_packages == FALSE)) {
      install.packages(packages[!installed_packages])
    }
    invisible(lapply(packages, library, character.only = TRUE))

    # install PedsPheWAS package
    devtools::install_github("monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS")
    library(PedsPheWAS)

## Tutorial

This tutorial demonstrates how to use the PedsPheWAS R package to
perform a PheWAS analysis using simulated data.

The current version of Peds-Phecodes supports ICD-9-CM, ICD-10-CM, and SNOMED CT codes.

### 1) Prepare and load input data

To perform a PheWAS, the user must provide three data frames: 1) a data
frame containing patient diagnosis codes (ICD-9-CM, ICD-10-CM, SNOMED CT) and code counts
(or code index dates), 2) a data frame with patient sex (used to
determine case/control/exclude status for sex-specific phecodes), and 3)
a data frame containing the patient genotypes.

An example of each of these data frames is provided below, showing the
required column formatting.

    example_data_icd <- vroom::vroom("./data/person_icd.csv",
                                     .name = janitor::make_clean_names, delim = ",",
                                     col_types = c(id = "i", vocabulary_id = "c", code = "c", count = "i"))

![example_data_icd](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/example_data_icd.png)

    example_data_sex <- vroom::vroom("./data/test_sex.csv",
                                     .name = janitor::make_clean_names, delim = ",",
                                     col_types = c(id = "i", sex = "c"))
                                  
![example_data_sex](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/example_data_sex.png)

    example_data_genotypes <- vroom::vroom("./data/test_genotypes.csv",
                                           .name = janitor::make_clean_names, delim = ",",
                                           col_types = c(id = "i", rs_example = "i"))

![example_data_genotypes](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/example_data_genotypes.png)

### 2) Mapping patient diagnosis codes to pediatric phecodes (Peds-Phecodes)

The createPedPhenotypes() function maps ICD-9-CM, ICD-10-CM, and SNOMED CT codes to Peds-Phecodes.

    ped_phenotypes <- createPedPhenotypes(example_data_icd, example_data_sex)

The function returns a data frame of boolean phenotypes, in which the
first column contains patient IDs and the remaining columns indicate
case/control/exclude status (i.e., TRUE/FALSE/NA) for each phecode.

The example output is shown below:

![ped_phenotypes](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/ped_phenotypes.png)

### 3) Preparing data for PheWAS

Join the patient genotype data to the boolean phenotypes generated by
the createPedPhenotypes() function to create the data frame needed to
perform PheWAS. If planning to adjust for covariates (e.g., age,
gender), these should also be joined to the data frame.

    df_full <- inner_join(example_data_genotypes, ped_phenotypes, by = "id")

The final data frame is shown below:

![df_full](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/df_full.png)

### 4) Performing PheWAS

The phewas\_ext() function performs the PheWAS using the data frame with
phenotype, genotype, and any covariate data.

    results <- phewas_ext(phenotypes=names(ped_phenotypes)[-1], genotypes = colnames(example_data_genotypes)[2], df_full)

The example output is shown below:

![results](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/results.png)

### 5) Plotting PheWAS results

The results of the PheWAS can be visualized in a Manhattan plot using
the plotManhattan() function. The Manhattan plot shows the negative log
p-value of the associations, with phecodes arranged on the x-axis by
disease category. Annotations can be added to the plot to highlight
notable associations.

Note: To show all desired annotation labels regardless of overlap, run
the following code:

    options(ggrepel.max.overlaps = Inf)

##### 1) Manhattan plot with annotations specified using annotate.level:

    test_plot1 <- plotManhattan(results, annotate.phenotype = T, annotate.level = 0.005, y.axis.interval = 1)

![test_plot1](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/test_plot1.png)

##### 2) Manhattan plot with annotations specified using annotate.list:

    test_plot2 <- plotManhattan(results, annotate.phenotype = T, annotate.list = c("622"), y.axis.interval = 1)

![test_plot2](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/test_plot2.png)

##### 3) Manhattan plot without annotations:

    test_plot3 <- plotManhattan(results, annotate.phenotype = F, y.axis.interval = 1)

![test_plot3](https://github.com/monikagrabowska/PedsPheWAS/blob/main/example/test_plot3.png)

## Citations

##### Peds-Phecodes:

Grabowska ME, Van Driest SL, Robinson JR, Patrick AE, Guardo C, Gangireddy S, Ong HH, Feng Q, Carroll R, Kannankeril PJ, Wei WQ. Developing and evaluating pediatric phecodes (Peds-Phecodes) for high-throughput phenotyping using electronic health records. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2024 Jan 18;31(2):386-395. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocad233. PMID: 38041473; PMCID: PMC10797257.

##### Original PheWAS R package:

Carroll RJ, Bastarache L, Denny JC. R PheWAS: data analysis and plotting
tools for phenome-wide association studies in the R environment.
Bioinformatics. 2014 Aug 15;30(16):2375-6. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btu197. Epub 2014 Apr 14. PMID: 24733291; PMCID:
PMC4133579.
